feat(docs): add docs for object conversions (#563)
bytecodealliance/jco: docs/src/wit-type-representations.md

# WIT Type Representations

Similar to any other guest langauge, there are multiple type systems in play when dealing with JS WebAssembly components.

Types represented in [WebAssembly Interface Types ("WIT")][wit] must be converted down to types that are familiar for Javascript,
and [Typescript][ts] (if dealing with `jco types` or `jco guest-types` subcommands).

This document details the type representations and usage for types that are defined in WIT and built into components.

[wit]: https://github.com/WebAssembly/component-model/blob/main/design/mvp/WIT.md
[ts]: https://www.typescriptlang.org/

## Basic types

Here is a basic table of conversions between WIT types and JS types:

More complicated types that are built into WIT but require more work to translate are explained below.

| WIT type | JS Type   |
|----------|-----------|
| `u8`     | `number`  |
| `u16`    | `number`  |
| `u32`    | `number`  |

> | `u64`    | `number`  |

Reviewer: We use `BigInt` for u64.

Author: Ah yes -- this should have been `BigInt`, will fix

| `s8`     | `number`  |
| `s16`    | `number`  |
| `s32`    | `number`  |
| `s64`    | `number`  |
| `f32`    | `number`  |
| `f64`    | `number`  |
| `bool`   | `boolean` |
| `char`   | `string`  |
| `string` | `string`  |

## List (`list`)

### WIT Syntax

```
list<u8>
list<string>
```

### Jco Representation

> Jco represents lists with native Javscript Arrays, with some exceptions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jco represents lists with native Javscript Arrays, with the exception of a `list<u8>`:
```

| Type       | Representation (TS) | Example                      |
|------------|---------------------|------------------------------|
| `list<u8>` | `Uint8Array`        | `list<u8>` -> `Uint8Array`   |
| `list<t>`  | `T[]`               | `list<string>` -> `string[]` |

## Tuples (`tuple`)

### WIT Syntax

```wit
tuple<u32, u32>
tuple<string, u32>
```

### Jco Representation

Jco represents tuples as lists (arrays), so some examples:

| Type                 | Representation (TS) | Example                                    |
|----------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| `tuple<u32, u32>`    | `[number, number]`  | `tuple<u32, u32>` -> `[number, number]`    |
| `tuple<string, u32>` | `[string, number]`  | `tuple<string, u32>` -> `[string, number]` |

## Records (`record`)

### WIT Syntax

```wit
record person {
    name: string,
    age: u32,
}
```

### Jco Representation

> Jco represents records as the [Javascript Object basic data type][mdn-js-obj]:

Reviewer: The extra information for object types, is that optional types on objects are represented as optional properties of the object itself.

Author: Ah thanks for the note, I'll include an `option<string>` in there as an example to illustrate that

> [!NOTE]
> See the [Variant section of the WIT IDL](https://github.com/WebAssembly/component-model/blob/main/design/mvp/WIT.md#item-variant-one-of-a-set-of-types) for more information on Variants

Variants are an enum-with-data type in WIT -- this means that alternative values may also hold *different*
kinds of data. For example:

```wit
variant exit-code {
  success,
  failure-code(u32),
  failure-msg(string),
}
```

### WIT syntax

```wit
variant filter {
    all,
    none,
    some(list<string>),
}
```

### Jco Representation

Jco represents variants as objects with a `tag` that represents the variant, and `data` that represent the content:

For example, pseudo Typescript for the of the above `filter` variant would look like the following:

```ts
// Filter with all
{
  tag: 'all';
}

// Filter with None
{
  tag: 'none';
}

// Filter with some and a list of strings
{
  tag: 'some';
  data: string[];
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> WIT `variant`'s options may only contain *one* piece of data.
>
> You can work around this limitation of variants by having the contained type be a *tuple*,
> (e.g. `tuple<string, u32, string>`), or using a named record as the related data.

> ## Result (`result`)

Reviewer: We're missing `optional` here as well, and I think we should put both result and optional before lists, tuples and objects and right after variants, because they have interesting chaining behaviours with the other types.

Author: Ah yes -- will add optional and do a bit of a restructuring in something closer to simple type order.

Author: Ah *one* change I did here was to put objects *before* tuples.

What I'm going for (insipired by the issues what you pointed out) is to include the listing this way:
- basic types
- sum/product types
- containers (fixed)
- containers (unbounded)
- resources

> [!NOTE]
> See the [Basic types section of the WIT IDL](https://github.com/WebAssembly/component-model/blob/main/design/mvp/WIT.md#types) for more information on Resources

Result represent a result that *may or may not* be present, due to a failure. A result value either contains
a value that represents a completed computation, or some "error" that indicates a failure. You can think

> of the type of a result as:

Reviewer: This doesn't feel quite right to me.

Rather the rule is something like:

> A result has two representations depending on whether it is the return type of a function or a nested type. When a result is returned directly from a function, any thrown error of the function is treated as the result error type, while any direct return value is treated as the result success type. On the other hand, a result stored inside a type otherwise returned from a function will be treated as a result type much like a variant type of the form `{ tag: 'ok', val: SuccessType } | { tag: 'err', val: ErrorType }`.

Author: That paragraph is actually a general description on the `Result` type as a general concept -- I don't think it's something everyone will have necessarily seen, especially in the JS world (as opposed to just `value | null` or something).

I included the rule you added -- IIRC it's actually configurable but I won't mention that here!

> (e.g. `tuple<string, u32, string>`), or using a named record as the related data.

## Records (`record`)

### WIT Syntax

```wit
record person {
    name: string,
    age: u32,
    favorite-color: option<string>,
}
```

### Jco Representation

Jco represents records as the [Javascript Object basic data type][mdn-js-obj]:

Given the WIT record above, you can expect to deal with an object similar to the following Typescript:

```ts
interface Person {
  person: string;
  age: number;
  favoriteColor?: number;
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> If using `jco guest-types` or `jco types`, you will be able to use Typescript types that
> properly constrain the Typescript code you write.

[mdn-js-obj]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object

## Options (`option`)

### WIT Syntax

```wit
option<u32, u32>
option<string, u32>
```

### Jco Representation

Jco represents options as as an optional (arrays), so some examples:

| Type          | Representation (TS)  | Example                               |
|---------------|----------------------|---------------------------------------|

> | `option<u32>` | `number | undefined` | `option<u32>` -> `number | undefined` |

Author: AH thanks for pointing this out -- I see the case in `as_nulalble()`... Will add this

> When used in the context of a `record` (which becomes a [JS Object][mdn-js-obj]), optional values are represented as optional properties (i.e in TS a `propName?: value`).

Reviewer: Another point to include for option here is that functions taking options as arguments have those arguments treated as optional arguments

Author: Yup, will add to this -- along with the nesting note

Consider the following interface:

```wit
interface fallible {
    f: func(n: u32) -> result<string, string>;
}
```

An implementation of the function `fallible.f` would look like the following Typescript:

```ts
function f(n: number): string {
  if (n == 42) { return "correct"; }
  throw "not correct";
}
```

On the other hand, a `result` stored inside a type or used in another context will look like a variant type of the form `{ tag: 'ok', val: SuccessType } | { tag: 'err', val: ErrorType }`. For example:

```wit
interface fallible-reaction {
    r: func(r: result<string, string>) -> string;
}
```

An implementation of thef function `fallible-reaction.r` would look like the following Typescript:

```ts
type Result<T,E> = { tag: 'ok', val: SuccessType } | { tag: 'err', val: ErrorType };

function f(input: Result<string, string>): string {
  switch (input.tag) {
    case 'ok': return `SUCCESS, returned: [${input.val}]";
    case 'err': return `ERROR, returned: [${input.val}]";
    // We we should never reach the case below
    default: throw Error("something has gone seriously wrong");
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: There's even more to mention on the Result type actually, in particular the behaviour of `getErrorPayload`:

* When running components in JS hosts, host functions may want to throw real JS errors per JS idioms for other callers instead of throwing the exact type expected by Jco. For example when an error code number is expected, throwing a number for JS consumers would be a JS anti-pattern.
* To support this, Error objects with a `payload` property will have that `payload` property extracted as the result error type.
* For example, a host function may be written `function importedJcoFunctionThatThrows () { throw Object.assign(new Error('Error for JS users'), { payload: ERR_CODE_JCO_ERROR_CODE_PER_RESULT_ERR_TYPE }) }`

Author: Hmnn OK I think we might want to make these sections a bit more explicit so they're easy to scan, will do some refactoring and add these notes w/ examples here.

Author: Hey I addressed this -- please take a look https://github.com/bytecodealliance/jco/pull/563/commits/c148e759ed694e3b9fdb671f11e7c0c32459283d
(unfortunately there's a little reorg in there, but I think I added an easy-to-understand example of your notes above).

  tag: 'all';
}

// Filter with None
{
  tag: 'none';
}

// Filter with some and a list of strings
{
  tag: 'some';
  data: string[];
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> WIT `variant`'s options may only contain *one* piece of data.
>
> You can work around this limitation of variants by having the contained type be a *tuple*,
> (e.g. `tuple<string, u32, string>`), or using a named record as the related data.

## Records (`record`)

### WIT Syntax

```wit
record person {
    name: string,
    age: u32,
    favorite-color: option<string>,
}
```

### Jco Representation

Jco represents records as the [Javascript Object basic data type][mdn-js-obj]:

Given the WIT record above, you can expect to deal with an object similar to the following Typescript:

```ts
interface Person {
  person: string;
  age: number;
  favoriteColor?: number;
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> If using `jco guest-types` or `jco types`, you will be able to use Typescript types that
> properly constrain the Typescript code you write.

[mdn-js-obj]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object

## Options (`option`)

### WIT Syntax

```wit
option<u32, u32>
option<string, u32>
```

### Jco Representation

> Jco represents options as as an optional (arrays), so some examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jco represents options as an optional value or undefined, so some examples:
```

| `option<option<u32>>` | `{ tag: "some" | "none", val: number }` | `option<u32>` -> `number | undefined` |

> [!WARNING]
> "single level" `option`s are easy to reason about, but the doubly nested case (`option<option<_>>`) is more complex.
>
> Due to the important distinction between a missing optional versus an `option` that *contains* an empty value,
> doubly-nested (or more) `option`s are encoded with the object encoding described above, rather than as an optional value.

### `option`s in context: Records

When used in the context of a `record` (which becomes a [JS Object][mdn-js-obj]), optional values are represented as optional properties (i.e in TS a `propName?: value`).

### `option`s in context: Function arguments/return values

When used in the context of arguments or return to a function, single level `option`s are represented as optional values:

Consider the following interface:

```wit
interface optional {
    f: func(n: option<u32>) -> string;
}
```

An implementation of the function `optional.f` would look like the following Typescript:

```ts
function f(n?: number): string {

>   if (typeof n === 'undefined') { return "no n provided"; }

Reviewer: Undefined checking in JS doesn't need a typeof, that's only for objects and other types.

```suggestion
  if (n === undefined) { return "no n provided"; }
```

Author: Ah -- tahnks!

of the type of a result as:

```
Result<SuccessType, ErrorType>
```

### WIT Syntax

```wit
result<_, string>
result<, string>
```

### Jco representation

In Javsacript, computation that fails or errors are often represented as exceptions -- and depending on how
the `result` is used, Jco adheres to that representations.

When used as an *output* to a function, `throw`ing an error will suffice. Given the following WIT interface:

```wit
add-overflow: func(lhs: u32, rhs: u32) -> result<u32, string>;
```

The following JS function would satistfy the WIT interface:

```js
function addOverflow(lhs, rhs) {
    let sum = lhs + rhs;
    if (Nan.isNan(sum)) {
      throw "ERROR: addition produced non-number value";
    } else if (sum > 4294967295) {
      throw "ERROR: u32 overflow";
    }
    return sum;
}
```

While JS automatically converts numbers, we must be careful to not attempt passing a number
that would *not* fit in a `u32` (unsigned 32 bit integer) via WebAssembly.

> [NOTE]
> How JS treats large numbers is not in focus here, but it is worth noting that
> `Number.MAX_VALUE + Number.MAX_VALUE === Infinity`.

### Typescript Schema

```
interface Result {
  ok: null
  data: null

> }

Reviewer: Not clear what this is describing?

Author: Ah this was a really old artifact, the `type Result<T,E>` is much easier to parse, updating to that!
